Experience Survey Interview — Participant ES1

Date – 31st May 2019   Time – 11.50 pm to 12.00 pm
Name – ES1
First time Manager year –   2011       Company name – PIL
Current Profile – Safety head, Reliance Infrastructure ltd

Interviewer:
Good Morning sir!! Thanks a lot for giving this opportunity to interview you and record the conversation for my dissertation project. Sir, I would like you to share your experiences, thoughts, observations etc with respect to the challenges faced by an executive when he becomes a manager for the first time in his career and leads a team to achieve results in line with the expectations of the management. The purpose of the study is to identify factors and make a comprehensive model explaining the transformation of an executive into a successful first line manager.

ES1:
When I was appointed in 2011 there was no department on ground so there was a big challenge of establishing the department and training the team mates who were relatively less experienced. We had to draft the policies, establish systems and procedures and then implement them.
I arranged both internal and external training. We conducted two types of training for people at site, one is functional training where we teach them the systems and procedures and their technicalities. The other is management training where we train them to organize the departments and conduct the programs effectively.
To be successful you have to build a successful team. To build successful team you have to build rapport with the subordinates which gives rise to mutual trust between the manager and the teammates. To build the rapport you need to be friendly with them, you need to support them on the work, they should feel freedom to come to you with problems and you should give them the solutions. Also they reciprocate by giving more information about ground realities etc so you also benefit of knowing facts and your decision making improves.
About the targets we used to pressure of reducing accidents at site. We are in the business of infrastructure and we are building highways and bridges etc where accidents used to be a regular phenomenon. But slowly my team mates received the required training, systems and procedures were in place and they developed confidence and they in turn used to train our site employees who used to then implement all the safety requirements and protocols while doing the site work and the accidents started reducing.
Fresh MBAs must spend time on the field and learn lot of things and also know the culture of the organization, so work experience of the field is a must which will help them later on when they start working in the offices. But the new generation does not like the field work and want to have white collar job right in the beginning but that brings a disconnect and is not helpful to the manager going forward.
Most of the managers want to stick to the timings and do not want to overstay but many times the work exigencies force them to wait and finish the work before leaving which they should get used to if they want to be successful managers. But there should be no compulsion, when the managers stress themselves on their own then there is no issue infact in a way they get satisfaction from that but if there is compulsion from the top and then they are forced to stay back they don’t like it that way.
To be successful the first and foremost thing the managers must do is to learn the core of the business they are in, they have to understand their job from all the directions viz, technical, legal, financial etc. In this mostly books may be of little help and you have gain knowledge from the seniors by asking them and getting the doubts cleared then and there. Once you are well versed with the technical knowledge of the business you are in then the life becomes much simpler.
That’s all from my side.

Interviewer: Thanks a lot sir for this wonderful interview, I would be taking inputs from similar more interviews with other managers and hopefully be ready with structured questionnaire in couple of weeks. The data collected through those structured questionnaires will be statistically analysed to derive conclusions.
Thanks once again!!
