Experience Survey Interview — Participant ES2

Date – 2nd June 2019   Time – 7.20 pm to 7.34 pm
Name – ES2
First time Manager year –     1991      Company name – Herdillia Chemicals ltd
Current Profile – Vice President commercial, MAN Industries ltd

Interviewer:
Good Morning sir!! Thanks a lot for giving this opportunity to interview you and record the conversation for my dissertation project. Sir, I would like you to share your experiences, thoughts, observations etc with respect to the challenges faced by an executive when he becomes a manager for the first time in his career and leads a team to achieve results in line with the expectations of the management. The purpose of the study is to identify factors and make a comprehensive model explaining the transformation of an executive into a successful first line manager.

ES2:
First challenge is to understand that to be successful in a human organization you need to understand the human aspects, soft skills, understanding the culture of the organization, building the bridges with juniors, peers as well as seniors, develop proper communication skills and involve into communication with all the three categories above, make your self acceptable to them all. So first and foremost thing is that all of them should absorb you accept you as one among them.
Then come the second challenge is to understand the realities or real life challenges with respect to technicalities of the function you are in, be it marketing, sales, logistics, finance etc, you need to understand that there exists a gap between what is theory from books and what is the reality and reality must be grabbed with observation and querying the seniors, peers and subordinates.
We were given a two-week induction training in which the technical aspects were covered in good details the products, the departments, the organization history and hierarchy, etc and then we were put in field were we learned the things or tricks of trade to start getting the work done. But no special management related training was given, but I think it is the person who decides how to evolve from a FLM to a Manager.
Because I started as a team leader in operations department were our prime focus was to keep the operations running shift after shift, there were no other targets given you. But I know that such targets are being given nowadays and managers find it difficult to achieve them when they are relatively new and yet to settle down in their managerial roles.
Handling rejections is far more serious matter than handling failures. The problem starts with your own ideas about yourself and how people should accept you and treat you, your own attitude etc, and it depends on individuals own intellect and his own assessment of himself …when you find others have different ideas and approaches for you it is kind of set back to you… but handling such situations is easier said than done.
Also I strongly feel that this quality of handling failures or rejections or non-cooperation etc must be developed from childhood so it is more or parental responsibility. Also the educations institution or the colleges have to play a greater role in telling them and preparing them to handle such situations and bounce back from it.
I strongly feel the attitude of the individual is the most important thing and how to build that attitude is a long drawn process.
While working in a team of blue collared employees you have to forget your degree for at least 6 months, keep aside your ego and think your self as you are one of them. You need to forget me, I, my success, my college etc and just understand them and understand the work they are doing instead of trying to correct them using the bookish knowledge you have earned during your graduations. Also one must understand how to deal with different individuals as per their temperament. See they are different individuals and you can not use the same formula with each one of them. Also socialising with them outside the office environment also helps a lot in team development as it helps to cross the walls and build bridges. Team building is an art and finally it is the team which performs, you call it politics or strategies or tricks but you have to bring the team together to perform and get the required results.
That’s all from my side.

Interviewer: Thanks a lot sir for this wonderful interview, I would be taking inputs from similar more interviews with other managers and hopefully be ready with structured questionnaire in couple of weeks. The data collected through those structured questionnaires will be statistically analysed to derive conclusions.
Thanks once again!!
