Experience Survey Interview — Participant ES5

Date – 2nd June 2019   Time – 4.58 pm to 5.18 pm
Name – ES5
First time Manager year –     1991      Company name – Herdillia Chemicals ltd
Current Profile – Vice President Projects, Reliance Industries Ltd.

Interviewer:
Good Morning sir!! Thanks a lot for giving this opportunity to interview you and record the conversation for my dissertation project. Sir, I would like you to share your experiences, thoughts, observations etc with respect to the challenges faced by an executive when he becomes a manager for the first time in his career and leads a team to achieve results in line with the expectations of the management. The purpose of the study is to identify factors and make a comprehensive model explaining the transformation of an executive into a successful first line manager.

ES5:
See usually in most cases you get promoted to a managerial position after working for some days in the field and when you become manager, till yesterday you were one of them and now you are one above them so you will always have a mixed reaction. In your team some will be feeling hurt that u got it instead of them, some may be feeling that you deserved it more and hence your got it, some will decide to make your life miserable etc. But you have to believe in your management’s decision and consider yourself to be most deserving candidate for the management’s current requirement and hence they chose you. Even then the first few days that awkward feeling will be there but slowly you and the team will get used to it.
During initial phase, do not try to prove your superiority, which should eventually get established through various interactions with the teams. So what matters is how you handle situations through human touch. You may also have a superior performer/ knowledgeable person in the team than yourself, then you have to use his skills for the teams benefit and when he succeeds give him all the credit and publicly acknowledge his contributions. Due to this even other team members get motivated to contribute in their areas of expertise and thus the team delivers better and better results.
Class room training of becoming an effective manager will definitely help if given to the new promotes but other option is hand holding or on the job training by the superiors, who can guide the new managers on dos and don’ts for the managers.
Eg till the time your superiority is established you should insist them to come to your table for discussions or reporting but later on it doesn’t really matter whether they come to you or you go them.
In case even after efforts one of the subordinates does not accept you as his boss and doesn’t report to you, then you have to talk to him in person and tell him that you have nothing against you but whether he likes it or not he has to accept you as your boss other wise further course of action to be taken.
With respect to going into depth of technicalities of the trade and not just trying to manage the situations using your soft skills is the need of the day. The person once becomes the manager has the onus to know the technical aspects of all the critical parameters, and if he does not take effort to do so then the senior must tell him to do so because the in-depth knowledge will give him the edge and his superiority will get demonstrated and his performance as a team leader will better further.
The skilled employees or blue collared employees today and 20 years before there is a big difference. Todays skilled employee is equally aware of many things that you are aware of thanks to google. So knowledge wise you and him are not far apart, so today you need to treat them as equals and partners in work.
With respect to getting social with them outside the office environment or attending their family functions or marriages etc is helpful as it gives a certain high to the employee because he realises that you have gone out of way to be there and must have compromised some personal agendas, so respect in his mind about you definitely goes up and also he never misses a chance to reciprocate by supporting you at work or otherwise even if it means for him going out of way.
You have to be also be careful and evaluate your supervisor who is giving you hand holding whether he is strengthening your hand or breaking your hand, as he may advice you to keep a distance from the employees etc. and develop your own judgement over time and act accordingly.
Regarding the failures, the manager must have the leader’s courage to accept the entire responsibility of failure and accept it in front of the superior. Do not point figures on to the team members. Once you do that the team starts respecting you more than before and starts improving its performance for meeting future targets leaving behind the past failures. So follow the rule team’s success is that of success of team members and team failure is the failure of the leader and then the onus of improving the situations to prevent future failures automatically lies with the leader.
That’s all from my side.

Interviewer: Thanks a lot sir for this wonderful interview, I would be taking inputs from similar more interviews with other managers and hopefully be ready with structured questionnaire in couple of weeks. The data collected through those structured questionnaires will be statistically analysed to derive conclusions.
Thanks once again!!
