Experience Survey Interview — Participant ES3

Date – 18th May 2019   Time – 11.45 am to 12.05 am
Name – ES3
First time Manager year –  1992         Company name – Godrej and Boyce Mfg. co ltd.
Current Profile – Owner of Bloome Business Consultants Pvt Ltd

Interviewer:
Good Morning sir!! Thanks a lot for giving this opportunity to interview you and record the conversation for my dissertation project. Sir, I would like you to share your experiences, thoughts, observations etc. with respect to the challenges faced by an executive when he becomes a manager for the first time in his career and leads a team to achieve results in line with the expectations of the management. The purpose of the study is to identify factors and make a comprehensive model explaining the transformation of an executive into a successful first line manager.

ES3:
I started my initial assignment as a Management Trainee in Finance department of Godrej and Boyce Mfg. in 1991. After a year of training period I was absorbed in Executive cadre. Although no team was directly reporting to me but I was in cadre above many of the departmental staff and hence indirectly the staff and officers were reporting to me. Later in 1995 when I became a Finance Director a big team was put under me and I was directly responsible for the team results.
In my initial company, it was a very old company with its own legacy systems and culture. So a young manager who has to get my things done, I had to deal with staff and officers who were much senior to me in experience and age and deeply rooted in the systems and culture of the organization. So initially I spend a lot of time learning things from them. So I think the first big challenge one faces is when you have to get some job done from them by directly telling them to do so. Sometimes you can see the things differently and have different perspective of the things and may have some innovative new ideas of doing the job in much faster and efficient way. It is a challenge how you bring about these ideas to the table. You need to look for opportunities and capture them to chip in your ideas.
It all depends on the organization culture too, if the organization is more open and professional then the things become more easy and less resistance is offered to new ideas.
We were given an induction for a period of one or two months but it was more about knowing the organization and its products and nothing specific to the job I am supposed to be doing.
My initial job was sort of business process reengineering, being an engineer more of IT support and automation ideas with innovative solutions. That time more of client server systems were existing and ERP concept was not yet wide spread. So I had to study the current systems and procedures and suggest changes to improve productivity.
In 1995 when I was made finance director a large team came under me and I started handling it for the first time. There was a resistance as I was an outsider for the organization and the existing staff and managers were looking at me in that way and there was a bit of resistance. It was a professional organization which was joint venture between Indian and German company it was a progressive and professional set up. I adopted the style of taking every one along and not to offer drastic changes and no changes in reporting relationships that existed before. But slowly slowly I started working my way around and started streaming of the processes and increasing efficiency of the operations. International standard adoption helped us a long way in streamlining efforts and in the process I could settle down as a well-accepted boss of the team.
I believe to be successful along with the man management the core knowledge of the business you are in, the technicalities of operations etc. is a must for the manager. In the absence of which you will not command respect, you may still be successful but you will be just managing the situations and not driving them. So situation management comes from your soft skills but team management and taking the team to a successful position by effectively guiding and driving it in the business comes from additional efforts on the part of the manager along with the soft skills he possesses. There is no substitute to the hard work.
See in the initial phase as an FLM you are learning a lot, in fact your learning starts only after you finish your studies and internship and takes up managerial position. Now you don’t have anyone to fall back on and everyone is going to look up to you for solutions and directions and hence sound knowledge and mental attitude to get to the core of the things is a must for a successful manager. Along with this learning you are also expected to deliver as a team and there is no holiday there and hence as an FLM you need to double up your efforts.
Also nowadays the organization and the environment changes rapidly and almost every two years the old practices become redundant and new technology based solutions have to be adopted to remain in the business. So the manager is expected to remain updated and renew himself regularly so that he is never an outdated leader for the team and even the team mates are now updated thanks to the technology of internet and are flooded with lots of relevant knowledge.
With respect to work life balance I did not find any issues as when I was an FLM I was not married and in 97 when I got married I was already done my initial hard work and got established in the hierarchy. Nowadays many organizations plan towards making the managers life enjoyable by providing various discounted vacation schemes etc and provide opportunities to have quality time with your family and this helps the mangers to rejuvenate and come back to the work with full zeal.
So my message to the young FLMs will be that there is no substitute for the hard work, you need to understand the core aspects of the business you are in and for that you need to put in extra efforts during the initial phase, do not get carried away by the existing systems and processes and if you feel it needs to change you need to put your idea forward. Only care you need to take is that you need to take the existing people along and introduce ideas to improve the system with their bye in!!
That’s all from my side!!

Interviewer: Thanks a lot sir for this wonderful interview, I would be taking inputs from similar more interviews with other managers and hopefully be ready with structured questionnaire in couple of weeks. The data collected through those structured questionnaires will be statistically analysed to derive conclusions.
Thanks once again!!
