Experience Survey Interview — Participant ES4

Date – 16th May 2019   Time – 3.55 pm to 4.05 pm
Name – ES4
First time Manager year – 1990           Company name – Burroughs Welcome
Last Industry assignment – COO ARAMUC Worldwide, Marketing head Pfizer Hospital Anti-infective
Current designation – Associate Professor NMIMS pharma management

Interviewer:
Good Morning sir!! Thanks a lot for giving this opportunity to interview you and record the conversation for my dissertation project. Sir, I would like you to share your experiences, thoughts, observations etc. with respect to the challenges faced by an executive when he becomes a manager for the first time in his career and leads a team to achieve results in line with the expectations of the management. The purpose of the study is to identify factors and make a comprehensive model explaining the transformation of an executive into a successful first line manager.

ES4:
Well earlier days the norm was that before you are made a first line manager you must be possessing 6 to 8 years of experience in the field. So by the time he is made a manager he is already having the maturity that comes by the age and experience and it helped them to gel in the role. But nowadays the number of FLMs required are many as the organizations are focusing on Tier 2 and 3 cities etc. and hence they cannot wait for long and with 3 to 4 years of experience and a good management education they are promoting them to role of FLM. So the FLMs are much younger and the required maturity is lacking.
Secondly, during the college education and even in the internship and training period it is all about the skill and knowledge. But once you are in the role of FLM you need to have Team Management expertise which includes not only managing the team to get results but also to make it into a strong team. Which comes from experience or learning from your role models in the field.
The team members look forward to the leader in many aspects. But when he is not able to become their role model and not able to inspire them the team performance starts going down. Many managers in such situations resort to taking up their earlier job of the doer to either prove it to team members or the top management as they become insecure. But this going back to their earlier role doesn’t help his current role of getting the team targets achieved.
Also as compared to earlier case he has less number of years of experience of achieving numbers in the field and it also acts negatively and suppresses the confidence of the manager in managing the number target for the team.
As far as the technical or product knowledge is concerned you may also have 3 or 4 guys in the team with the same level and hence it doesn’t help to strive for more knowledge, instead he should hone up his man management skills.
Top management and HR definitely should play a role in identifying the potential employees and give them the required training about the man management, or making them to be part of other teams with a view to learn the man management. This is not done in many companies and even though they do have some kind of training usually, the typical exposure of man management is missing.
So many instances it becomes a double blow as you lose a star performer on the field as you have promoted him from the sales person’s role and also you end up getting a lousy manager who cannot ensure the targets for the team.
To be successful FLM a balanced temperament is a must, as he has to face various pressures simultaneously like business pressures, team mates personal pressures, administrative pressures, personal front pressures as you are now the family head of two families. So he needs to maintain his cool and be pragmatic about it.
He is the link between the employees and the top management and has to work like a permeable membrane between the two. He has to do lot of filtering, modifying etc before he passes information from the field to the top management also at the same time the messages from the top management are well filtered before they are passed down to the field force absorbing most of the shock and bitterness himself.
FLM need not worry much about balancing his reporting to his boss or the regional manager as they are aware of the hardship the FLM goes through, he must speak to the top management through the results by continuously motivating and developing the team. He should know for sure that no other person from the management is going to make his hands dirty and do the field work he does and that they are just there as mentors or guides.
I started my career in 1985 from Burrows Welcome as a MR in Chennai and my last assignment was Marketing head in KP business ventures.

Interviewer: Thanks a lot sir for this wonderful interview, I would be taking inputs from similar more interviews with other managers and hopefully be ready with structured questionnaire in couple of weeks. The data collected through those structured questionnaires will be statistically analysed to derive conclusions.
Thanks once again!!
